# Challenge #201: Get Your Priorities Right!

[http://www.reddit.com/r/dailyprogrammer/comments/2vkwgb/20150211_challenge_201_practical_exercise_get/](http://www.reddit.com/r/dailyprogrammer/comments/2vkwgb/20150211_challenge_201_practical_exercise_get/)

## (Practical Exercise): Get Your Priorities Right!

A [priority queue](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Priority_queue) is a data
structure similar to a standard queue, except that entries in the queue have a
priority associated with them - such that, when removing items from the queue,
the entry with the highest priority will be removed before ones with lower
priority. This is similar to a hospital triage system: patients with more
severe wounds get treated quicker, even if they arrived later than a patient
with a smaller injury. Let's say I have a priority queue containing strings,
where the priority value is a real number. I add these 3 objects to my priority
queue, in no particular order:

    Patient           Priority
    -------           --------
    "David Whatsit"   3.06
    "Joan Smith"      4.33
    "Bob Testing"     0.39
    "Samuel Sample"   1.63

Here, if I was to _dequeue_ four strings from the priority queue, the strings
`"Joan Smith"`, `"David Whatsit"`, `"Samuel Sample"` and `"Bob Testing"` would
come out, in that order.

But what if we could assign _two_ priorities to each object? Imagine a hospital
(to keep with the theme), that needs to keep a list of equipment supplies and
their costs. It also needs to keep track of how long it will take to receive
that item.

    Item                                  Cost    Shipping Time
    ----                                  ----    -------------
    Hyperion Hypodermic Needle            £1.99   3 days
    SuperSaver Syringe                    £0.89   7 days
    InjectXpress Platinum Plated Needle   £2.49   2 days

Here, when the hospital is at normal running conditions with good supply stock,
it would want to buy the cheapest product possible - shipping time is of little
concern. Thus, dequeueing by the _Lowest Cost_ priority would give us the
SuperSaver syringe. However, in a crisis (where supply may be strained) we want
supplies as fast as possible, and thus dequeueing an item with the _Lowest
Shipping Time_ priority would give us the InjectXpress needle. This example
isn't the best, but it gives an example of a priority queue that utilizes _two
priority values_ for each entry.

Your task today for the (non-extension) challenge will be to implement a
two-priority priority queue for strings, where the priority is represented by a
real number (eg. a floating-point value). The priority queue must be able to
hold an unbounded number of strings (ie. no software limit). __If your language
of choice already supports priority queues with 1 priority, it might not be
applicable to this challenge - read the specification carefully.__

## Specification

### Core

Your priority queue must implement at least these methods:

* `Enqueue`. This method accepts three parameters - a __string__, __priority
value A__, and __priority value B__, where the priority values are _real
numbers_ (see above). The __string__ is inserted into the priority queue with
the given priority values __A__ and __B__ (how you store the queue in memory is
up to you!)
* `DequeueA`. This method removes and returns the __string__ from the priority
queue with the highest __priority A__ value. If two entries have the same A
priority, return whichever was enqueued first.
* `DequeueB`. This method removes and returns the __string__ from the priority
queue with the highest __priority B__ value. If two entries have the same B
priority, return whichever was enqueued first.
* `Count`. This method returns the number of strings in the queue.
* `Clear`. This removes all entries from the priority queue.

### Additional

If you can, implement this method, too:

* `DequeueFirst`. This removes and returns the `string` from the priority queue
that was `enqueued first`, ignoring priority.

Depending on how you implemented your priority queue, this may not be feasible,
so don't get too hung up on this one.

### Extension

Rather than making your priority queue only accept strings, make a __generic__
priority queue, instead. A generic object is compatible with many types. In
C++, this will involve the use of
[templates](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template_(C%2B%2B)). More reading
resources [here](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generic_programming). For
example, in C#, your class name might look like `DualPriorityQueue<TEntry>`.
Some dynamic languages such as Ruby or Python do not have static typing, so
this will not be necessary.

## Notes

### Making Use of your Language

The main challenge of this exercise is knowing your language and its features,
and adapting your solution to them. For example, in .NET-based languages,
`Count` would be a property rather than a method, as that is more idiomatic in
those languages. Similarly, in some languages such as Ruby, F# or other
functional language, overloading operators may be more idiomatic than the usage
of verbose Enqueue and Dequeue functions. How you do the specifics is up to
you.

You should also be writing clean, legible code. Follow the style guide for your
language, and use the correct naming/capitalisation conventions, which differ
from language to language. Consider writing [unit
tests](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_testing) for your code, as an exercise
in good practice!

### Tips and Reading Material

If you are planning on using something like a heap for the priority queue,
consider interleaving each item into two heaps to store both priorities. How
you will handle the dequeueing is part of the fun! If the concept of a priority
queue is new to you, here is some reading material.

* [University of Wisconsin-Madison: priority
queue](http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~vernon/cs367/notes/11.PRIORITY-Q.html)
* [Queues and Priority
Queues](http://www.oopweb.com/Java/Documents/ThinkCSJav/Volume/chap16.htm)

Here's some more stuff on unit testing.

* [Unit testing on
WikiBooks](http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Introduction_to_Software_Engineering/Testing/Unit_Tests)
* [MSDN: .NET unit
tests](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh694602.aspx)
* [Writing good unit
tests](https://developer.salesforce.com/page/How_to_Write_Good_Unit_Tests)

## Finally...

I wonder what this data structure would be called? A double priority queue?

Got a good idea for a challenge? Head on over to
[`/r/DailyProgrammer_Ideas`](http://www.reddit.com/r/DailyProgrammer_Ideas) and
tell us!
